---
description: Medium
---

# 1249. Minimum Remove to Make Valid Parentheses

Given a string s of `'('` , `')'` and lowercase English characters.

Your task is to remove the minimum number of parentheses \( `'('` or `')'`, in any positions \) so that the resulting _parentheses string_ is valid and return **any** valid string.

Formally, a _parentheses string_ is valid if and only if:

* It is the empty string, contains only lowercase characters, or
* It can be written as `AB` \(`A` concatenated with `B`\), where `A` and `B` are valid strings, or
* It can be written as `(A)`, where `A` is a valid string.

**Example 1:**

```text
Input: s = "lee(t(c)o)de)"
Output: "lee(t(c)o)de"
Explanation: "lee(t(co)de)" , "lee(t(c)ode)" would also be accepted.
```

**Example 2:**

```text
Input: s = "a)b(c)d"
Output: "ab(c)d"
```

**Example 3:**

```text
Input: s = "))(("
Output: ""
Explanation: An empty string is also valid.
```

**Example 4:**

```text
Input: s = "(a(b(c)d)"
Output: "a(b(c)d)"
```

**Algorithm**

Let's put all this together into a 2-pass algorithm.

1. Identify all indexes that should be removed.
2. Build a new string with removed indexes.

As explained above, we should use a **stack**. If we put the _indexes_ of the `"("` on the stack, then we'll know that all the indexes on the stack at the _end_ are the indexes of the unmatched `"("`. We should also use a **set** to keep track of the unmatched `")"` we come across. Then, we can remove the character at each of those indexes and then return the edited string.

We need to be really careful with that "removal" step though, as it can be done inO\(n\)O\(n\)O\(n\), but there are many ways of accidentally making itO\(n2\)O\(n^2\)O\(n2\). Making these mistakes \(and not fixing them\) in an interview won't look good. Here's some operations that areO\(n\)O\(n\)O\(n\) that people sometimes assume areO\(1\)O\(1\)O\(1\).

* Adding or removing \(or even changing\) just one character _anywhere_ in a **string** isO\(n\)O\(n\)O\(n\), because strings are **immutable**. The entire string is rebuilt for every change.
* Adding or removing _not from the end_ of a list, vector, or array isO\(n\)O\(n\)O\(n\) because the other items are moved up to make a gap or down to fill in the gap.
* Checking if an item is in a list, because this requires a **linear search**. Even if you use binary search, it'll still beO\(log⁡n\)O\(\log n\)O\(logn\), which is not ideal for this problem.

A safe strategy is to iterate over the string and insert each character we want to keep into a **list** \(Python\) or **StringBuilder** \(Java\). Then once we have all the characters, it is a singleO\(n\)O\(n\)O\(n\) step to convert them into a string.

Recall that checking if an item is in a **set** isO\(1\)O\(1\)O\(1\). If all the indexes we need to remove are in a set, then we can iterate through each index in the string, check if the current index is in the set, and if it is not, then add the character at that index to the string builder.

{% tabs %}
{% tab title="Java" %}
```java
class Solution {
    public String minRemoveToMakeValid(String s) {
        Set<Integer> indexesToRemove = new HashSet<>();
        Deque<Integer> stack = new ArrayDeque<>();
        for (int i = 0; i < s.length(); i++) {
            if (s.charAt(i) == '(') {
                stack.push(i);
            } if (s.charAt(i) == ')') {
                if (stack.isEmpty()) {
                    indexesToRemove.add(i);
                } else {
                    stack.pop();
                }
            }
        }
        // Put any indexes remaining on stack into the set.
        while (!stack.isEmpty()) indexesToRemove.add(stack.pop());
        StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder();
        for (int i = 0; i < s.length(); i++) {
            if (!indexesToRemove.contains(i)) {
                sb.append(s.charAt(i));
            }
        }
        return sb.toString();
    }
}
```
{% endtab %}

{% tab title="Python" %}
```python
class Solution:
    def minRemoveToMakeValid(self, s: str) -> str:
        indexes_to_remove = set()
        stack = []
        for i, c in enumerate(s):
            if c not in "()":
                continue
            if c == "(":
                stack.append(i)
            elif not stack:
                indexes_to_remove.add(i)
            else:
                stack.pop()
        indexes_to_remove = indexes_to_remove.union(set(stack))
        string_builder = []
        for i, c in enumerate(s):
            if i not in indexes_to_remove:
                string_builder.append(c)
        return "".join(string_builder)
```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity :O\(n\)O\(n\)O\(n\), wherennn is the length of the input string.

  There are 3 loops we need to analyze. We also need to check carefully for any library functions that are not constant time.

  The first loop iterates over the string, and for each character, either does nothing, pushes to a stack or adds to a set. Pushing to a stack and adding to a set are bothO\(1\)O\(1\)O\(1\). Because we are processing each character with anO\(1\)O\(1\)O\(1\) operation, this overall loop isO\(n\)O\(n\)O\(n\).

  The second loop \(hidden in library function calls for the Python code\) pops each item from the stack and adds it to the set. Again, popping items from a stack isO\(1\)O\(1\)O\(1\), and there are at mostnnn characters on the stack, and so it too isO\(n\)O\(n\)O\(n\).

  The third loop iterates over the string again, and puts characters into a StringBuilder/ list. Checking if an item is in a set and appending to the end of a String Builder or list isO\(1\)O\(1\)O\(1\). Again, this isO\(n\)O\(n\)O\(n\) overall.

  The `StringBuilder.toString()` method isO\(n\)O\(n\)O\(n\), and so is the `"".join(...)`. So again, this operation isO\(n\)O\(n\)O\(n\).

  So this gives usO\(4n\)O\(4n\)O\(4n\), and we drop the444 because it is a constant.

* Space complexity :O\(n\)O\(n\)O\(n\), wherennn is the length of the input string.

  We are using a **stack**, **set**, and **string builder**, each of which could have up to n characters in them, and so require up toO\(n\)O\(n\)O\(n\) space.

When checking your own implementation, watch out for anyO\(n\)O\(n\)O\(n\) library calls _inside loops_, as these would make your solution O\(n^2\)

